README.md, before:

# binsearch.py

binary search on a sorted array to find a value, takes args that will create a large list for testing.

Author:  c.gleeson 2018

```
Args:
1)  Int: Starting value of the range to search
2)  Int: Max value of the range to search
2)  Int: The step for the range (i.e. step by 1 or 2 or 13)
2)  Int: The value to search for inside the list created by the previous args

Example:  ./binsearch.py 0 1024 1 1024    
This example would create a list from 0 to 1024 (inclusive) stepping by 1, searching for the value 1024
and it will succeed.
```
# Note

This can be a deceiving algorithm at first.  If you don't have the actual algorithm memorized, I highly urge you to try implementing this once, without looking at the algorithm or code at all.  

It may surprise you, how easy it is to start out with a bad approach and end up with messy code to handle all of the corner cases.

If you can get this right on the first try without already knowing the exact algorithm:  
```"I'm not even mad, that is amazing."```

I will fully admit that my first time doing this cold (no internet, no books) I made it a lot more complex than it needed to be.  This is the cleanest implementation that I have written so far.

# Example output, success:

Create a list from 0-1024 (inclusive), stepping by 1's, looking for value 1023
```
$ ./binsearch.py 0 1024 1 1023

Running a binary search on a list from 0 to 1024 stepping by 1
With search value of: 1023
Number of elements in the list: 1025
Max possible iterations log2(len(numbers_list)) ~=  11
Search complete after 10 iterations

FOUND: 1023 was found in the range!
```

Create a list from 0-1024 (inclusive), stepping by 3's, looking for value 999
```
$ ./binsearch.py 0 1024 3 999

Running a binary search on a list from 0 to 1024 stepping by 3
With search value of: 999
Number of elements in the list: 342
Max possible iterations log2(len(numbers_list)) ~=  9
Search complete after 7 iterations

FOUND: 999 was found in the range!
```

# Example output, failure:

Create a list from 0-10 (inclusive), stepping by 1's, looking for value -1
```
$ ./binsearch.py 0 10 1 -1

Running a binary search on a list from 0 to 10 stepping by 1
With search value of: -1
Number of elements in the list: 11
Max possible iterations log2(len(numbers_list)) ~=  4
Search complete after 3 iterations

NOT FOUND: -1 was not found in the range!
```

Create a list from 0-10000 (inclusive), stepping by 1's, looking for value 10002
```
$ ./binsearch.py 0 10000 1 10002

Running a binary search on a list from 0 to 10000 stepping by 1
With search value of: 10002
Number of elements in the list: 10001
Max possible iterations log2(len(numbers_list)) ~=  14
Search complete after 14 iterations

NOT FOUND: 10002 was not found in the range!
```

Commit message:

added mention of Jon Bentley's work in PP

README.md, after:

# binsearch.py

binary search on a sorted array to find a value, takes args that will create a large list for testing.

Author:  c.gleeson 2018

```
Args:
1)  Int: Starting value of the range to search
2)  Int: Max value of the range to search
2)  Int: The step for the range (i.e. step by 1 or 2 or 13)
2)  Int: The value to search for inside the list created by the previous args

Example:  ./binsearch.py 0 1024 1 1024    
This example would create a list from 0 to 1024 (inclusive) stepping by 1, searching for the value 1024
and it will succeed.
```
# Note

This can be a deceiving algorithm at first.  If you don't have the actual algorithm memorized, I highly urge you to try implementing this once, without looking at the algorithm or code at all.  

It may surprise you, how easy it is to start out with a bad approach and end up with messy code to handle all of the corner cases.

If you can get this right on the first try without already knowing the exact algorithm, congratulations, you are in the upper 10% of professional coders according to Jon Bentley's "Programming Pearls":  https://www.amazon.com/Programming-Pearls-Press-Louis-Bentley/dp/0201103311/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1526106060&sr=8-2&keywords=programming+pearls

I will fully admit that my first time doing this cold (no internet, no books) I made it a lot more complex than it needed to be.  This is the cleanest implementation that I have written so far.

# Example output, success:

Create a list from 0-1024 (inclusive), stepping by 1's, looking for value 1023
```
$ ./binsearch.py 0 1024 1 1023

Running a binary search on a list from 0 to 1024 stepping by 1
With search value of: 1023
Number of elements in the list: 1025
Max possible iterations log2(len(numbers_list)) ~=  11
Search complete after 10 iterations

FOUND: 1023 was found in the range!
```

Create a list from 0-1024 (inclusive), stepping by 3's, looking for value 999
```
$ ./binsearch.py 0 1024 3 999

Running a binary search on a list from 0 to 1024 stepping by 3
With search value of: 999
Number of elements in the list: 342
Max possible iterations log2(len(numbers_list)) ~=  9
Search complete after 7 iterations

FOUND: 999 was found in the range!
```

# Example output, failure:

Create a list from 0-10 (inclusive), stepping by 1's, looking for value -1
```
$ ./binsearch.py 0 10 1 -1

Running a binary search on a list from 0 to 10 stepping by 1
With search value of: -1
Number of elements in the list: 11
Max possible iterations log2(len(numbers_list)) ~=  4
Search complete after 3 iterations

NOT FOUND: -1 was not found in the range!
```

Create a list from 0-10000 (inclusive), stepping by 1's, looking for value 10002
```
$ ./binsearch.py 0 10000 1 10002

Running a binary search on a list from 0 to 10000 stepping by 1
With search value of: 10002
Number of elements in the list: 10001
Max possible iterations log2(len(numbers_list)) ~=  14
Search complete after 14 iterations

NOT FOUND: 10002 was not found in the range!
```
